# VSCode project template for RP2040 C/C++ development

```bash
PICO_SDK_PATH C:\Pico
PICO_INSTALL_PATH C:\Pico\pico-sdk
PICO_TOOLCHAIN_PATH C:\Pico\gcc-arm-none-eabi

```
https://zadig.akeo.ie/
https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf
https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-setup-windows
https://github.com/LearnEmbeddedSystems/rp2040-project-template
https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-sdk/releases/tag/1.5.1
https://learnembeddedsystems.co.uk/vscode-rp2040-project-creation-steps


# Pico Setup for Windows

## Installing the tools

Download [the latest
release](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-setup-windows/releases/latest/download/pico-setup-windows-x64-standalone.exe)
and run it.

## Starting Visual Studio Code

In your Start Menu, look for the *Pico - Visual Studio Code* shortcut,
in the *Raspberry Pi Pico SDK \<version\>* folder. The shortcut sets up
the needed environment variables and then launches Visual Studio Code.

## Opening the examples

The first time you launch Visual Studio Code using the Start Menu
shortcut, it will open the
[pico-examples](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples)
repository.

To re-open the examples repository later, you can open the copy
installed at `C:\Users\<user>\Documents\Pico-<version>\pico-examples`.

## Building an example

Visual Studio Code will ask if you want to configure the pico-examples
project when it is first opened; click *Yes* on that prompt to proceed.
(If you miss the prompt look for the 'bell' icon in the bottom right.)
You will then be prompted to select a kit -- select the *Pico ARM GCC -
Pico SDK Toolchain with GCC arm-none-eabi* entry. If the *Pico ARM GCC*
entry is not present, select *Unspecified* to have the SDK auto-detect
the compiler.

To build one of the examples, click the *CMake* button on the sidebar.
You should be presented with a tree view of the example projects; expand
the project you'd like to build, and click the small build icon to the
right of the target name to build that specific project.

To build everything instead, click the *Build All Projects* button at
the top of the CMake Project Outline view.

## Debugging an example

The `pico-examples` repository comes with `.vscode\*.json` files
configured for debugging with Visual Studio Code. You can copy these
files into your own projects as well.

To start debugging an example, click the *Run and Debug* button on the
sidebar. The *Pico Debug* launch configuration should be selected
already. To start debugging, click the small 'play' icon at the top of
the debug window, or press F5.

The first time you start debugging, you will be prompted to select a
target. If you wish to later change the launch target, you can do so
using the status bar button with the name of the target.

Assuming that you have a Picoprobe configured and connected to your
target device, your selected target should now be built, uploaded, and
started. The debugger interface will load, and will pause the execution
of the code at the `main()` entry point.

At this point, you can use the usual debugging tools to step, set
breakpoints, inspect memory, and so on.

### Wiring up SWD and UART to Picoprobe

Picoprobe wiring is explained in the [Getting started
document](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf),
*Appendix A: Using Picoprobe*, under the heading *Picoprobe Wiring*.

The Raspberry Pi Pico board used as Picoprobe should be flashed with the
latest `picoprobe.uf2` build available at [Picoprobe
releases](https://github.com/raspberrypi/picoprobe/releases/latest/download/picoprobe.uf2).
The OpenOCD build included with the SDK installer only supports the
CMSIS-DAP version of Picoprobe.

### Open serial monitor in VSCode

The SDK installer adds the *Serial Monitor* extension to Visual Studio
Code. Picoprobe includes a USB-serial bridge as well; assuming that you
have wired up the TX and RX pins of the target to Picoprobe as described
previously, you should have an option to select *COMn - USB Serial
Device (COMn)* in the *Serial Monitor* tab in the bottom panel.

The baud rate should be set to the default of 115200 in most cases.
Click *Start Monitoring* to open the serial port.

## Command-line usage

To build and debug projects using command-line tools, you can open a
terminal window using the *Pico - Developer Command Prompt* or *Pico -
Developer PowerShell* shortcuts.

### Start OpenOCD and gdb

``` powershell
openocd -f interface/cmsis-dap.cfg -f target/rp2040.cfg -c "adapter speed 5000"
```

If you wish to run gdb from the command line, you can invoke it like
this:

``` powershell
arm-none-eabi-gdb
```

For example, to load and debug the `hello_serial` example, you might do:
(assuming that OpenOCD is already running as described above)

``` powershell
cd ${env:PICO_EXAMPLES_PATH}\build\hello_world\serial\
arm-none-eabi-gdb hello_serial.elf # hello_serial.elf is built at SDK install time by pico-setup.cmd
```

Then inside gdb:

    (gdb) target remote localhost:3333
    (gdb) load
    (gdb) monitor reset init
    (gdb) continue

## Creating a new project

The commands below are for PowerShell, and will need to be adjusted
slightly if you're using Command Prompt instead.

1.  Copy pico_sdk_import.cmake from the SDK into your project directory:

    ``` powershell
    copy ${env:PICO_SDK_PATH}\external\pico_sdk_import.cmake .
    ```

2.  Copy VS Code configuration from the SDK examples into your project
    directory:

    ``` powershell
    copy ${env:PICO_EXAMPLES_PATH}\.vscode . -recurse
    ```

3.  Setup a `CMakeLists.txt` like:

    ``` cmake
    cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.13)

    # initialize the SDK based on PICO_SDK_PATH
    # note: this must happen before project()
    include(pico_sdk_import.cmake)

    project(my_project)

    # initialize the Raspberry Pi Pico SDK
    pico_sdk_init()

    # rest of your project
    ```

4.  Write your code (see
    [pico-examples](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples) or the
    [Raspberry Pi Pico C/C++ SDK](https://rptl.io/pico-c-sdk)
    documentation for more information)

    About the simplest you can do is a single source file (e.g.
    hello_world.c)

    ``` c
    #include <stdio.h>
    #include "pico/stdlib.h"

    int main() {
        setup_default_uart();
        printf("Hello, world!\n");
        return 0;
    }
    ```

    And add the following to your `CMakeLists.txt`:

    ``` cmake
    add_executable(hello_world
        hello_world.c
    )

    # Add pico_stdlib library which aggregates commonly used features
    target_link_libraries(hello_world pico_stdlib)

    # create map/bin/hex/uf2 file in addition to ELF.
    pico_add_extra_outputs(hello_world)
    ```

    Note this example uses the default UART for *stdout*; if you want to
    use the default USB see the
    [hello-usb](https://github.com/raspberrypi/pico-examples/tree/master/hello_world/usb)
    example.

5.  Launch VS Code from the *Pico - Visual Studio Code* shortcut in the
    Start Menu, and then open your new project folder.

6.  Configure the project by running the *CMake: Configure* command from
    VS Code's command palette.

7.  Build and debug the project as described in previous sections.

## Uninstalling

Open the *Apps and Features* section in Windows Settings, then select
*Raspberry Pi Pico SDK \<version\>*. Click the *Uninstall* button and
follow the prompts.
